1- What is Node.js?
    Node.js is a JavaScript runtime environment.
    It allows you to run JavaScript on server side.
    Built on Chrome’s V8 JavaScript engine.
    Single-threaded event loop → handles many connections without blocking. 

2- Node.js is single threaded then how to make it multithreaded
    we can use worker_threads module to run JS in parallel threads.
    Each worker has its own event loop, memory, and V8 instance.

3- if we delete package-lock.json file will delete from server then it is working or not
    If you delete it, the project might still run.
    But you lose version control guarantees → may break later.

4- Main Features of Node.js
    a- Asynchronous & Non-blocking I/O  
        Node.js uses an event-driven architecture.  
        Operations like file reading, DB queries, and network requests don’t block the main thread.
    b- Single threaded
        Uses the event loop to handle many clients with one thread.
        Can support thousands of concurrent connections efficiently.
    c- Built on Google’s V8 Engine
    d- Cross-platform
    e- NPM 
    f- Real-time Application Support
        Perfect for apps like chat, gaming, live updates, notifications,
        Uses WebSockets and event-driven design for instant communication.
    f- Community Support & Open Source

5- What are some disadvantages of Node.js? 
    Node.js runs on a single thread using the event loop.

    ❌ Not ideal for CPU-intensive tasks such as:

    Image processing
    Video encoding
    Heavy calculations
    Data analytics

    This blocks the event loop and prevents other requests from being processed.

    Solution: Use Worker Threads, Child Processes, or Microservices.
    
6- What are Modules?
    A module is simply a reusable block of code that can be split into separate files and imported when needed.
    Types of Modules in Node.js
    a- Core Modules (built-in)
       You don’t need to install them.(ex:fs, path, http, os)
       path- Used to work with file and directory paths.
       fs- fs module allows you to interact with the file system on your computer.
            You can read, write, update, delete, and rename files using it.
       http- module lets you create a web server and handle requests and responses.
       events- Node.js has an event-driven architecture.
                The events module allows you to create, fire, and listen for custom events.
                It uses the EventEmitter class.
       os-  The os module provides information about the operating system and hardware.
    b- Local Modules
        Modules you create yourself and use in your project.
    c- Third-party Modules
        installed via npm (ex. express, mongoose)
        
7- What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous code in Node.js?
    a- Synchronous-
        Executes line by line (blocking).
        Each operation must finish before the next one starts.
        If one task takes a long time, everything else is paused until it completes.
    b- Asynchronous-
        Non-blocking.
        Operations are executed in the background.
        While waiting, Node.js can continue running other code.
        Results are handled using callbacks, promises, or async/await.

8- What is the difference between CommonJS (require) and ES Modules (import)?
            	          CommonJS (CJS)	             ES Modules (ESM)
        Syntax	          require               	     import
        Loading	          Modules load synchronously.	 Modules are loaded asynchronously.
        Export style	  module.exports = ...	            export / export default

        To use ES Modules in Node.js inside package.json.
        {
        "type": "module"
        }
        Without this, Node.js treats files as CommonJS by default.

9- What is package.json and package-lock.json?
    a- package.json- 
        Contains metadata about your project (name, version, description, author, etc.)
        Lists dependencies and scripts used in your project.
    b- package-lock.json- 
        It’s an auto-generated file created when you install dependencies with npm install.
        Ensures exact versions of dependencies are installed.
        Contains a detailed tree of all installed packages (including nested dependencies).
        Helps maintain consistency across environments (same versions in dev, staging, production).

10- Explain the role of npm in Node.js.
    It is the default package manager for Node.js.
    It allows developers to install, share, and manage libraries (packages) in a Node.js project.

11- What is the difference between npm install and npm ci?
    Use npm install → during development (flexible, updates allowed).
    Use npm ci → in CI/CD pipelines & production (faster, deterministic installs).

12- What are Node.js global objects? Give examples.
    Global Object	Description
    __dirname	    Current directory path
    __filename	    Current file path
    console	        Logging utility
    process	        Info/control about running process
    Buffer	        Binary data handling
    setTimeout / clearTimeout	Timer (delay)
    setInterval / clearInterval	Timer (repeat)
    setImmediate / clearImmediate	Run after I/O events
    require	Import modules (CJS)
    module	Info about current module

13- What is the Node.js event loop?
    The event loop allows Node.js to handle non-blocking asynchronous operations using a single thread.
    It processes:
    Timers
    I/O callbacks
    Promises (microtasks)
    This is why Node.js is efficient for I/O-heavy backend systems.

14- Event Loop Architecture in JavaScript / Node.js
    JavaScript is single-threaded, meaning it executes one task at a time. The Event Loop allows JavaScript to handle asynchronous operations (API calls, timers, file operations, etc.) without blocking the main thread.

    The Event Loop is a mechanism that continuously checks whether the Call Stack is empty. If it is, the Event Loop takes tasks from the Microtask Queue first and then from the Callback Queue (Macrotask Queue) and pushes them to the Call Stack for execution, enabling JavaScript to perform asynchronous operations while remaining single-threaded.

15- What is the difference between setTimeout, setInterval, and setImmediate?
    a- setTimeout:-  Executes a function after specified delay in miliseconds
    b- setInterval:- Executes a function repeatedlly at specified delay in miliseconds
    c- setImmediate:-Executes a function immediately after the curret event and before any timers like setTimeout(()=>{},0) 


16- How does Node.js handle child processes?
    Node.js uses the built-in child_process module to create and manage child processes. It provides methods like spawn, exec, execFile, and fork to run system commands or separate Node.js scripts. Child processes run outside the main event loop and communicate with the parent via events or IPC, which helps avoid blocking and enables parallel execution of heavy tasks.

17- Explain streams in Node.js and their types.
    Streams in Node.js are objects that allow processing data in chunks instead of loading the entire data into memory. They improve performance and memory efficiency when handling large files, network requests, or real-time data. Node.js provides four types of streams: Readable Streams for reading data, Writable Streams for writing data, Duplex Streams for both reading and writing, and Transform Streams for modifying data while it is being streamed. The pipe() method is commonly used to connect streams efficiently.

18- What is buffer in Node.js?
    A Buffer in Node.js is a temporary storage area for raw binary data.

    Buffers help Node.js handle binary data directly (since JavaScript normally works with strings and doesn’t handle raw bytes well)

19-

20-What is CORS and how do you handle it in Node.js?
    CORS stands for Cross-Origin Resource Sharing, a browser security feature that restricts cross-domain requests. In Node.js (with Express), we typically handle it using the cors package or by manually setting Access-Control-Allow-* headers. This tells the browser which origins, methods, and headers are allowed, and handles preflight requests for methods like POST/PUT/DELETE.

    const express = require("express");
    const cors = require("cors");
    const app = express();

    // Allow all origins (not recommended for production)
    app.use(cors());

    // OR allow specific origins
    app.use(cors({
    origin: "http://localhost:3000", // frontend origin
    methods: "GET,POST,PUT,DELETE",
    credentials: true
    }));

    app.get("/api", (req, res) => {
    res.json({ message: "CORS enabled" });
    });
    app.listen(5000, () => console.log("Server running on 5000"));


21-

22-What is the difference between process.nextTick() and setImmediate()? 
    Both process.nextTick() and setImmediate() schedule callbacks, but they run at different points in the Node.js event loop. process.nextTick() runs immediately after the current operation, before the event loop continues, while setImmediate() runs on the next iteration, after I/O events. process.nextTick() has higher priority but can cause event loop starvation if overused, while setImmediate() is safer for deferring execution.

    example:
    setImmediate(() => console.log("setImmediate"));
    process.nextTick(() => console.log("nextTick"));
    console.log("Start");
    output:
    Start
    nextTick
    setImmediate



23-How does clustering work in Node.js?
    Node.js runs on a single thread (event loop).
    By default, it uses only one CPU core — even if your system has 8 cores.
    Clustering allows Node.js to create multiple processes (workers) that share the same server port, enabling full use of multi-core CPUs and handling more requests in parallel.
    Benefits of Clustering:
        i- Better CPU Utilization – Uses multiple cores.
        ii- Increased Throughput – Handles more concurrent requests.
        iii- Fault Tolerance – If one worker crashes, others keep running.
        iv- Scalability – Handles high-traffic apps more efficiently.

24-What are worker threads in Node.js?
    Worker Threads in Node.js allow running JavaScript in parallel on multiple threads inside the same process. They are mainly used for CPU-intensive tasks, unlike clustering which creates separate processes for I/O scalability. Worker threads can share memory using SharedArrayBuffer and communicate via message passing, making them useful for heavy computations without blocking the event loop.

25-What are the differences between cluster, child_process and worker_threads?
    cluster:
    have multiple process
    each process has its own memory space

    child_process:
    have multiple process
    each process has its own memory space

    worker_threads: 
    have multiple threads within one process
    can share memory (SharedArrayBuffer)

26-How does Node.js manage memory?
    Node.js manages memory using the V8 engine. Memory is divided into stack (primitives, function calls) and heap (objects, closures). The heap is further split into new space and old space, managed by V8’s garbage collector using algorithms like Scavenge and Mark-Sweep-Compact. Buffers and native modules allocate memory outside the V8 heap. Node.js provides process.memoryUsage() and debugging tools to monitor memory, and developers must avoid leaks caused by global variables, unclosed timers, or event listeners.


27-What is the difference between event-driven programming and multi-threaded programming?
    event-driven programming:- A programming paradigm where the flow of the program is determined by events (user actions like clicks, key presses, or system-generated signals like network requests).
    The program usually runs in a single thread.
    There’s an event loop that continuously listens for events.
    multi-threaded programming:-A programming model where a program can execute multiple threads of execution concurrently.


28-How can you prevent callback hell in Node.js?
    Callback hell happens when multiple nested callbacks make code unreadable and hard to maintain. We can prevent it in several ways:
    we can use promises or async/await to avoid callback hell.

29-What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous error handling?
    Synchronous error handling deals with errors in the same call stack and can be caught directly with try/catch. 
    Asynchronous error handling deals with errors that occur later (e.g., in callbacks, Promises, or async functions). For async code, we use callbacks with error parameters, .catch() with Promises, or try/catch with async/await.

30-How do you secure a Node.js application?
    a- Validate all user inputs (use libraries like Joi or express-validator).
        const { body } = require("express-validator");
        app.post("/user", [
        body("email").isEmail(),
        body("name").trim().escape(),
        ], handler);
    b- Use helmet to set secure HTTP headers.

    c- To secure a Node.js application, I focus on validating and sanitizing input, preventing XSS/CSRF, securing authentication and authorization with bcrypt and JWT, enforcing HTTPS, using Helmet and rate limiting for common attack prevention, handling errors safely, keeping dependencies updated, and applying deployment best practices like least privilege and monitoring.
    d- Avoid using untrusted or outdated packages.
    e- Secure Authentication & Authorization
        Use JWTs or OAuth2 for authentication.
        Store passwords with bcrypt (never in plain text).
        Implement role-based access control (RBAC).

31-What is load balancing in Node.js and how is it achieved?
Load balancing is the process of distributing incoming network traffic (HTTP requests) across multiple servers or processes so no single instance is overwhelmed. This ensures high availability, scalability, and reliability of a Node.js application.
                                        or
Load Balancing: Load balancing is a proccess of distributing incoming traffic across multiple severs for improve performance and scalability

32- 


33- passport module in NodeJS?
    This middleware is used for implementing authentication and authorization in Express applications.

34- 

35-  web socket: High level protocol 
    WebSockets are used for real-time web application like chat apps, live notifications, online games, dashboard etc.
    used for client-server web communication
    full duplex- both client and server can send and recevied data simultaneously.

36- socket: low level protocol
    used in genral networking not browser networking,(FTP, SMTP)
    used inside backend system(node, python) not directly supported in browser 
    half-duplex- client or server can sends, then receives

37- Proxy: Client => Proxy => Server
It is a middleware that forwards requests between client and server 
when develop react application and frontend is at port 3000 and backend is at port 5000 then in this case cors issue create so fixing this issue used {"porxy": "http://localhost:5000"} inside package.json file of frontend.

There are three types of proxy:
a- Forword proxy- used by clients to access the internet securely
b- Reverse proxy- used by servers, to handle client request before they reach backend service
c- Transparent proxy- Used by organizations to monitor or control to internet usage

38- What is a Cron Job in Node.js?
    A cron job is a scheduled task that runs automatically at specific times or intervals (for example: every day at midnight, every 5 minutes, every Sunday, etc.).

    In Node.js, cron jobs are commonly used for background tasks that should run without user interaction.
    cron jobs are used for:
        Sending scheduled emails or notifications
        Cleaning old or expired data
        Generating daily/weekly reports
        Updating payment status (Stripe reconciliation)
        Auto-logout inactive users
        Clearing Redis cache periodically

39- What is backpressure?
    When data is produced faster than it can be consumed.
    Node streams handle it via:
        stream.pipe(dest);
40- How to Detect Memory Leaks?
    Use:
        Chrome DevTools
        Node Inspector (node --inspect app.js) => Then analyze memory in Chrome.
    Production Monitoring
        Tools:
            PM2
            New Relic
            Datadog

41- How to Handle Memory Leaks
        Remove unused event listeners.
        Clear timers (setInterval, setTimeout).
        Avoid global variables.
        Use streaming for large files instead of loading everything into memory.
        Limit in-memory caching; use Redis when appropriate.
        Profile memory with heap snapshots.
        Monitor memory usage in production.

42- Node.js Event Loop Phases
    ┌───────────────────┐
    │ Timers            │
    ├───────────────────┤
    │ Pending Callbacks │
    ├───────────────────┤
    │ Idle / Prepare    │
    ├───────────────────┤
    │ Poll              │
    ├───────────────────┤
    │ Check             │
    ├───────────────────┤
    │ Close Callbacks   │
    └───────────────────┘
    Node.js Event Loop has six phases: Timers, Pending Callbacks, Idle/Prepare, Poll, Check, and Close Callbacks. Timers executes setTimeout/setInterval callbacks, Poll handles I/O events, Check executes setImmediate callbacks, and Close Callbacks handles resource cleanup events. Between phases, Node.js also processes microtasks, where process.nextTick() has the highest priority followed by Promise callbacks and async/await continuations. This architecture allows Node.js to handle many concurrent I/O operations efficiently using a single thread.

    Current Call Stack
    ↓
    process.nextTick()
    ↓
    Promise.then / await
    ↓
    Timers (setTimeout/setInterval)
    ↓
    Pending Callbacks
    ↓
    Idle/Prepare
    ↓
    Poll (I/O)
    ↓
    Check (setImmediate)
    ↓
    Close Callbacks

